Perez JMR et al.
64 Rev Assoc Med Bras 2017; 63(1):64-69
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Clinical hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy score of the
Iberoamerican Society of Neonatology (Siben): A new proposal
for diagnosis and management
José Maria Rodriguez Perez1,2*, Sergio G. Golombek1,3,4, Augusto Sola1,2,4
1Sociedad Iberoamericana de Neonatología (Siben), Dana Point, CA, USA
2Centro Internacional de Neurodesenvolvimento Neonatal (CINN), São Paulo, SP, Brazil
3Maria Fareri Children’s Hospital at Westchester Medical Center, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY, USA
4New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY, USA
Summary
Study conducted at Centro Internacional
de Neurodesenvolvimento Neonatal
(CINN), São Paulo, SP, Brazil
Article received: 4/15/2016
Accepted for publication: 5/21/2016
*Correspondence:
Address: Rua Vargem Grande, 50
São Paulo, SP – Brazil
Postal code: 03316-020
joseperezneo@gmail.com
http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/1806-9282.63.01.64
Hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy is a major complication of perinatal asphyxia, with high morbidity, mortality and neurologic sequelae as cerebral palsy,
mostly in poor or developing countries. The difficulty in the diagnosis and
management of newborns in these countries is astonishing, thus resulting in
unreliable data on this pathology and bad outcomes regarding mortality and
incidence of neurologic sequelae. The objective of this article is to present a new
clinical diagnostic score to be started in the delivery room and to guide the
therapeutic approach, in order to improve these results.
Keywords: asphyxia, hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy, Siben Neurological Score.
Introduction
Hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy (HIE) is a disease with
a strong potential to cause cerebral palsy. Depending on
its severity, it may turn into an emotional, social, and
economic tragedy for the individual and their entire family, as well as society as a whole.
The pathophysiology of HIE has been described in
detail, with a primary phase leading to neuronal apoptosis1 and a secondary reperfusion phase that occurs about
six hours after the hypoxic ischemic insult, with various
types of response that may lead to a secondary neuronal
injury, compatible with the presence of neurologic sequelae in the newborn.
HIE is characterized by neurological symptoms of
variable severity, and is classified as mild, moderate and
severe. The condition is accompanied by the involvement
of one or more organs and may lead to multiple organ
failure. The symptoms vary according to the severity of
the disease and whether there is central nervous system
involvement, ranging from deterioration of wakefulness
up to seizures and coma; or from a multi-organ point of
view, involvement of the digestive tract (from vomiting
up to symptoms of necrotizing enterocolitis), the urinary
tract (from oliguria up to acute renal failure5
), the respiratory system (pulmonary hemorrhage up to pulmonary
hypertension2
) and the cardiovascular system, often with
sinus bradycardia3
 (predominance of the parasympathetic system), and, finally, metabolic disorders (calcium,
glucose and magnesium4
). All of these changes may aggravate the involvement of the central nervous system.
Currently, perinatal asphyxia associated with moderate or severe HIE, which is its main complication, affects
between 1-2/1,000 live births in developed countries and
is estimated at affecting between 10-20/1,000 live births
in poor or developing countries,6
 being responsible for
1/3 of neonatal mortality in these countries. However, we
believe that the actual incidence of HIE in poor and/or
developing countries is unknown. What we do know is
that in Brazil 13 to 15 newborns die every day as a result
of asphyxia, according to a study by the resuscitation
committee of the Brazilian Pediatric Society.7
 There are
several factors making us unaware of our HIE rate, as
published by Perez.8
 These include the difficulty presented by health teams to assess the newborns neurologically,
or a belief that an Apgar score of > 5 at 5’ or 10’ is sufficient
and necessary to rule out the diagnosis of HIE. A total
lack of preparedness among health teams in relation to
the use of neurological scores for the newborn or the 
Clinical hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy score of the Iberoamerican Society of Neonatology (Siben): A new proposal for diagnosis and management
Rev Assoc Med Bras 2017; 63(1):64-69 65
total lack of their use at some centers is prevalent. These
are some of the factors leading us to believe that the actual incidence of HIE is higher than that already published.
Having an easy-to-use clinical evaluation mechanism from
the moment of birth would favor the obtainment of a
more realistic notion of the importance of this pathology
in Brazil and in all developing countries, as well as a better therapeutic outcome for such patients.
Objective
To present a simple clinical neurological score for hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy developed by the
Iberoamerican Society of Neonatology (Siben) and a flow
chart to guide the diagnosis and management of newborns
who have suffered some degree of asphyxia.
Diagnosis of HIE and description of
the Siben HIE score
Considering a maternal obstetric history with the identification of hypoxic ischemic insult (e.g. umbilical cord
prolapse, uterine rupture) associated with the presence
of a low Apgar score and umbilical cord pH with acidosis
≤ 7.1 leads us to a diagnosis of HIE. However, proper neurological clinical examination of the newborn is essential
to confirm the diagnosis.
In order to systematize this neurological assessment
of newborns, several neurological scores have been created
for newborns, such as the currently available Sarnat and
Sarnat,9
 Thompson,10 and Garcia-Alix11 scores, as well as
others. None of these have been applied since the first minutes of life, and some of them are complex and/or use
supplementary exams.
In our view, a neurological score, including only
clinical aspects that can be started as soon as we finish
the Apgar score, is essential. Therefore, we have developed
the neurological score presented in Table 1.
This scale assesses ten clinical aspects and is very
simple to perform. As HIE has been previously classified
as mild, moderate or severe, each item evaluated varies
according to the degree of severity. For example, if spontaneous activity is absent, the corresponding item is found
in severe HIE (Table 1). A point is given to every item that
corresponds to a level in the Siben score, with the diagnosis of HIE considered as strongly suspect at a certain
level, in the presence of three points or more. In the event
of finding items at different levels, the level with the most
items found will predominate. For example, if a slight
change in the level of consciousness, such as being hyperalert, and a change in posture with mild distal flexion
and weak suction are found in a newborn with a history
of a hypoxic ischemic insult, we could classify this newborn
as presenting mild HIE. However, if convulsions, bradycardia, hypotonia, and a weak Moro reflex are presented
in association, we have a case in which signs of moderate
HIE predominate over the mild condition, and this should
be the established diagnosis. In short, the mild, moderate
or severe HIE diagnosis will predominate according to
the highest number of items (always above three) found
in the corresponding level.
The neurological score that we have developed is
shown in Table 1, and is called the HIE Score of the
Iberoamerican Society of Neonatology.
We use the Siben Neurological Score for all infants
who have an Apgar ≤ 5 in the first, fifth or tenth minute,
and we begin using it in the delivery room as soon as the
Apgar score is concluded. A diagnosis made as early as
possible will guide the treatment and possibly lead to a
more favorable outcome in the clinical case.
Unlike other neurological scores, our tool only relies
on clinical criteria for the score, which greatly facilitates
clinical monitoring and, in our opinion, the early diagnosis or early suspected diagnosis of HIE. In many centers
with high birth rates, prompt evaluation by a pediatric
neurologist with experience in neonatology, the possibility of performing electroencephalography (EEG) with an
integrated amplitude or an early conventional EEG, a very
early magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination
and laboratory tests (umbilical cord blood gases, creatine
phosphokinase – CPK, lactic dehydrogenase – LDH, and
others) are not available in the first hours of life or even
afterwards, especially in poor or developing countries.
For the implementation of this clinical score it is
important to train the medical and paramedical teams,
as well as to print and distribute a copy of the score to all
team members, and posting it in all sectors of the neonatology unit.
Validation of the score
No one argues that clinical assessment is essential in
neonatology, and our score adds the possibility of a better clinical assessment of newborns from the delivery
room onwards. To date, we have used this score in three
neonatal units to assess 26 newborns with a gestational
age of over 35 weeks and suspected diagnosis of HIE while
in the delivery room. All of these newborns had an Apgar
score 1’ ≤ 3 and presented a Siben score of 3 or more points
in the delivery room after completion of the Apgar score,
or were sent to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU)
with strong suspicion of HIE. The diagnosis was confirmed
in all newborns based on the development of the clinical 
Perez JM
R et al
.
66
 Rev
Assoc Med Bras 2017; 63(1):64-69
TABLE 1 Siben Neurological Score.
HIE Level of
consciousness
Spontaneous
activity
Posture Tonus Suction Moro reflex Pupils Heart rate Breathing Convulsion Total
points
Mild Hyperalert Normal Mild distal flexion Normal Weak Strong Mydriasis Tachycardia Spontaneous Absent
Moderate Lethargy Decreased Marked distal flexion Hypotonia Weak or
absent
Weak Miosis Bradycardia Periodic Frequent
Severe Stupor/Coma Not present Decerebration Flaccidity Not
present
Not present Diverted/
Non-reactive
Variable Apnea Infrequent
HIE: hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy.
Clinical hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy score of the Iberoamerican Society of Neonatology (Siben): A new proposal for diagnosis and management
Rev Assoc Med Bras 2017; 63(1):64-69 67
condition (emergence of seizures, apnea, bradycardia or
tachycardia, pupil changes, change in tonus, and eventual death) and all showed high levels of CPK and LDH.
All of the newborns underwent therapeutic hypothermia.
Seven newborn babies progressed to death (27%) and the
remaining 19 underwent MRI after 7 days of life. Six infants did not show any alterations in the MRI examination,
ten infants had some degree of damage to the basal ganglia and three newborns had damage to the gray matter.
The alterations presented by these 13 newborns were
compatible with the diagnosis of hypoxic ischemic insult
with subsequent progression to HIE (Table 2).
All of the assessors were unanimous in reporting ease
of use from the delivery room onwards and in the sequential neurological assessment of the newborn, greatly facilitating the diagnosis of HIE and progressive HIE, in
which the patient shows progressive clinical neurological
deterioration that can progress from mild to serious symptoms in a few hours.12 It is very likely that in every center
in which this clinical score is implemented there will be
no more undiagnosed cases, with at least a suspected
diagnosis of HIE, and we can use therapeutic measures
sooner, including therapeutic hypothermia, preventing
delayed diagnosis and administration of the appropriate
therapy. The next step in the evaluation and validation
will be to compare the statistics and the monitoring of
patients managed using this score.
With the advances that have occurred in recent years
to improve neonatal outcomes in newborns with HIE, the
establishment of an algorithm for the management of
HIE is fundamental, in addition to prevention and early
diagnosis, as described below.
HIE management algorithm
Seeking to facilitate the management of newborns with
suspected HIE and/or diagnosed with HIE, we have developed
an algorithm to guide the management of newborns from
the delivery room onwards in different clinical situations.
The importance of the Siben score for HIE lies in the
fact that it is a clinical score that is easy to conduct. Below,
we will describe an algorithm with measures to evaluate
and manage newborns based on their resulting score. Obviously, the need for resuscitation with or without cardiac
massage, the need for access to central vessels, mechanical
ventilation, and drugs will be undertaken according to the
general conditions of the newborn and according to the
protocols used, as well as the provision of the general basic
required by the newborn. The pH and/or excess base obtained in the umbilical cord blood or soon after birth may
be useful, but not always available. A pH < 7.1 and/or BE
> -14 has an acceptable positive predictive value; however,
they are not pathognomonic of HIE. A pH and/or BE close
to normal does not have negative predictive value. Therefore,
if the clinical score demonstrates moderate or severe degree,
TABLE 2 Clinical alterations compatible with HIE.
n (%) Magnetic resonance imaging with more than
7 days of life (n=19)
n (%)
Lethargy
Stupor/Coma
18 (69.2%)
5 (19.2%)
Mild distal flexion
Marked distal flexion
Decerebration
9 (34.6%)
12 (46.15%)
5 (19.2%)
Normal 6 (31.5%)
Hypotonia
Flaccidity
16 (61.5%)
10 (38.4%)
Changes in the basal ganglia 10 (52.63%)
Weak suction
No suction
18 (69.2%)
8 (30.7%)
Alterations to the gray matter 3 (15.78%)
Weak Moro reflex
No Moro reflex
19 (73.07%)
7 (26.9%)
Pupils mydriasis/miosis
Non-reactive pupils
20 (76.9%)
6 (23.07%)
Bradycardia
Bradycardia/Tachycardia
14 (53.8%)
12 (46.15%)
Periodic respiration
Apnea
20 (76.9%)
6 (23.07%)
Convulsions 14 (53.8%)
HIE: hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy.
Perez JMR et al.
68 Rev Assoc Med Bras 2017; 63(1):64-69
FIGURE 1 The flowchart summarizes the basic preventive and therapeutic measures of the Siben Neurological Score.
HIE: hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy; CPK: creatine phosphokinase; LDH: lactic dehydrogenase; NICU: neonatal intensive care unit.
this should not be ignored even with a pH > 7.1. Similarly
the CPK and LDH dosages have no prognostic value and
are not useful, in isolation, for a therapeutic decision. Furthermore, the laboratory results of enzymes may not be
available or it may take several hours to obtain these results.
The flowchart can guide the management of newborns
with clinical symptoms compatible with that described,
facilitating treatment (Figure 1).
Treatment
To prevent hypocapnia (cerebral hypoflow) or hypercapnia
(cerebral hyperflow) during mechanical ventilation. To prevent hyperthermia (accelerates the phenomenon of neuronal
apoptosis) and hyperoxemia (causes oxidative stress), increasing the risk of neuronal damage. To correct any occasional
metabolic disturbances (hypocalcemia, hypoglycemia, and
hypomagnesemia) that can worsen the clinical condition.
Apgar 1’ ≤ 3
Neonatologist identifies possible
hypoxic ischemic insult
After Apgar 10’:
Siben Neurological Score
Apgar 1’/5’/10’ = 3-5 Apgar 1’/5’/10’ > 5
Siben Neurological Score with 3
points or more for moderate or
severe HIE
Observation and basic
general measures
Siben Neurological Score every
2-3 hours healthy newborn or
mild HIE
Siben Neurological Score with
normal newborn or 3 points or
more for mild HIE
Siben Neurological Score
worsens with 3 points or more
for moderate or severe HIE
Send to NICU
Avoid hyperthermia and begin general preventive and
therapeutic measures without delay:
• Collect umbilical cord blood gasometry
• Collect CPK and LDH
IF pH < 7.1; high CPK and LDH:
• Sedation
• Mechanical ventilation
• Central venous access
• Prepare for therapeutic hypothermia
If repeated score presents 3 points or more
for moderate or severe HIE, prepare for
therapeutic hypothermia
Clinical hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy score of the Iberoamerican Society of Neonatology (Siben): A new proposal for diagnosis and management
Rev Assoc Med Bras 2017; 63(1):64-69 69
Therapeutic hypothermia is a therapeutic strategy with
scientifically proven benefits. However, the disparity of the
effectiveness of this therapy in developed and poor and/or
developing countries is clear,13 demonstrating advantages
in the use of equipment with Servo control and the supply
of heat by convection.14
In three studies already published,15,16 we have presented an alternative to the use of a device developed in
São Paulo (Brazil), the Neonatflow, with Servo control
and supply of heat by convection, as well as humidity and
isolation through the laminar flow system. We believe
that this device facilitates the treatment of these patients,
especially in poor and/or developing countries, where the
incidence of HIE is highest.
The basic measures to be adopted in a patient with a
diagnosis of moderate or severe HIE based on the Siben
score will initially be to avoid hyperthermia, by turning off
the radiant heat cradle or the incubator or adjusting the
desired central temperature by servo control if using the
Neonatflow in order to maintain the central temperature
between 33-34ºC for 72 hours. With regard to the ventilatory part, prevent hypoxia and hyperoxia, hypocapnia and
hypercapnia, promote continuous sedation through central
venous access, bladder catheterization and installation of
the EEG, if available.
Conclusion
The use of this clinical score can improve the objectivity
of the assessment and monitoring of newborns and the
early start of treatment. The use of the Siben Neurological Score proved to be easy to implement and provided a
more objective and early diagnosis of HIE. It may be of
greater value in poor and/or developing countries, or in
neonatal units without access to high-cost diagnostic
examinations (imaging, laboratory, and others).
Conflict of interest
José Maria Rodriguez Perez is one of the patent holders
of the Neonatflow device.
Resumo
Escore clínico de encefalopatia hipóxico-isquêmica da
Sociedad Iberoamericana de Neonatología (Siben): uma
nova proposta para seu diagnóstico e manejo perinatal
A encefalopatia hipóxico-isquêmica é a principal complicação da asfixia perinatal, com alta morbidade, mortalidade e incidência de sequelas neurológicas, como a
paralisia cerebral, principalmente em países pobres e/ou
em desenvolvimento. Nessas regiões, as dificuldades no
diagnóstico e no manejo desses recém-nascidos é surpreendente, o que resulta em dados pouco confiáveis e
em péssimos desfechos tanto no que se refere à mortalidade como à incidência de sequelas neurológicas. O
objetivo deste artigo é apresentar um novo escore para
o diagnóstico clínico ser iniciado na sala de parto e uma
abordagem terapêutica com o intuito de melhorar esses
resultados.
Palavras-chave: asfixia, encefalopatia hipóxico-isquêmica,
Escore Neurológico Siben.
References
1. Perez JMR, Feldman A, Alpan G. Treating hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy
with hypothermia. NeoReviews. 2015; 16(7):e413-9.
2. Kinsella JP, Abman SH. Recent developments in the pathophysiology and
treatment of persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn. J Pediatr.
1995; 126(6):853-64.
3. Rowe RD, Hoffman T. Transient myocardial ischemia of the newborn infant:
a form of severe cardiorespiratory distress in full-term infants. J Pediatr.
1972; 81(2):243-50.
4. Collins JE, Leonard JV. Hyperinsulinism in asphyxiated and small-for-dates
infants with hypoglycaemia. Lancet. 1984; 2(8398):311-3.
5. Tsang RC, Chen IW, Hayes W, Atkison W, Atherton H, Edwards N. Neonatal
hypocalcemia in infants with birth asphyxia. J Pediatr. 1974; 84(3):428-33.
6. Lawn J, Shibuya K, Stein C. No cry at birth: global estimates of intrapartum
stillbirths and intrapartum-related neonatal deaths. Bull World Health
Organ. 2005; 83(6):409-17.
7. Almeida MFB, Guinsburg R, Santos RM, Moreira LMO, Anchieta LM, Daripa
M; Coordenadores Estaduais do Programa de Reanimação Neonatal da SBP.
Brasil, 2005 e 2006: cinco recém-nascidos a termo sem malformações
congênitas morrem com asfixia ao nascer a cada dia. In: XX Congresso
Brasileiro de Perinatologia; 2010 Nov 21-24; Rio de Janeiro, RJ.
8. Perez JMR. Correlation between Apgar score and hipoxic-ischemic
encephalopathy. Correspondence. Rev Assoc Med Bras. 2015; 61(3):1.
9. Sarnat HB, Sarnat MS. Neonatal encephalopathy following fetal distress.
Obstet Gynecol Surv. 1977; 32(5):295.
10. Thompson CM, Puterman AS, Linley LL, Hann FM, van der Elst CW, Molteno
CD, et al. The value of a scoring system for hypoxic ischaemic encephalopathy in
predicting neurodevelopmental outcome. Acta Paediatrica. 1997; 86(7):757-61.
11. Martín-Ancel A, García-Alix A, Gayá F, Cabañas F, Burqueros M, Quero J. Multiple
organ involvement in perinatal asphyxia. J Pediatr. 1995; 127(5):786-93.
12. Gagne-Loranger M, Sheppard M, Ali N, Saint-Martin C, Wintermark P.
Newborns referred for therapeutic hypothermia: association between initial
degree of encephalopathy and severity of brain injury (what about the
newborns with mild encephalopathy on admission?). Am J Perinatol. 2015;
33(2):195-202.
13. Montaldo P, Pauliah SS, Lally P, Olson L, Thayyil S. Cooling in a low-resource
environment: lost in translation. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med. 2015; 20(2):72-9.
14. Perez JMR, Golombek S, Alpan G, Fajardo CA, Sola A. Comparison of
hypothermia for hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy with a laminar flow unit
(neonatflow) vs. NICHD trial. Vancouver: Pediatric Academic Society; 2014.
15. Perez JMR, Golombek S, Fajardo C, Sola A. A laminar flow unit for the care
of critically ill newborn infants. Med Devices (Auckl). 2013; 6:163-7.
16. Perez JMR, Golombek S, Alpan G, Sola A. Using a novel laminar flow unit
provided effective total body hypothermia for neonatal hypoxic
encephalopathy. Acta Pediatr. 2015; 104(11):e483-8.